Okay, tape is running again.
I've carried the books that I think you've got published so far and I've come up with
about 12 or 13.
Is that right?
I would imagine that's about right.
Okay, I think I've read everything that you had out at the present time.
My personal favorite is the faded centrology.
You've only made one comment on that which sort of answered one of my questions, which
is it pronounced them re?
Re-re-re.
If you'd modeled them in any culture, you've already answered that one.
I guess what I'll ask you is, what do you as their creator or Duncan, the human who lives
with them?
What do you admire about them?
I think that for one thing, I have about them re.
I think I admire their steadfastness.
Their ability to face time itself with tranquility in the sense that they can take the long
view, which is a thing that is absolutely necessary in my mind for civilized survival.
Mine, I don't say just survival, but civilized survival.
Is their ability to look down the centuries and see consequences?
The recent of time is a very strange thing.
The memory always lives now.
That now is a composite of the past, current events, and the future simultaneously.
They do not view time as the modern American does, which is more or less a set of beads
on the string that we can snip off any tail of the string that seems inconvenient to us.
The reconcept of the universe is holistic and their ability to perceive that all of time
impacts on every moment that they live.
I think it's one of the things that I most enjoy about that species.
What about Duncan?
Why does he choose to give up his humanity and become one of them?
The character of Duncan himself, he was born in the war probably in orphan, very early
in life, transferred to a state nursery and brought up to fight, essentially to pay for
his existence by becoming a soldier in a war that had gone on much longer than made
sense for anyone.
When he encountered the Marie, he is a very simple man in many ways.
He's highly educated in his narrow field of specialization, the states, all the rest.
But when he encounters the Marie, he cannot sympathize with the diplomats with anything
else that's going on.
But what he considered to be another soldier from his viewpoint, with a soldier's morality,
he could comprehend and respect that, that respect then led him to a deeper understanding
of the people.
To me, one of the more pathetic things in the story is Duncan himself who is attacking
the Regal Library, attempting a completely uneducated man in many ways, attempting to
understand the culture that he has just contributed to destroying.
And he becomes obsessed with it.
He finally conceives it as a moral responsibility of his own.
And thereby falls into a trap because his humanity, his sense of moral responsibility,
his feeling of blame for what has happened, leads him to attempt to save these people.
And once he has done that, he discovers that if he remains what he is, namely human, that
will effectively destroy them as any bomb, any attack could do.
So his final sacrifice in a sort of a redemptive sense is that he finally agrees that he won't
no longer attempt to be human.
And he begins to try to be something else.
Even in that, there is a considerable hazard because if the transition is not complete,
he may end up by contaminating the culture, which to the Marie and their way of life is
a very, very serious thing.
But it is a voluntary and conscious decision that is effectively a disbursement suicide.
And he takes it because he goes from the point of what has happened.
Okay.
I think it was in the second book of the series.
There was a particular episode that I guess the volume writing is this, I think that to
me the most.
Is the game called Shonai?
Shonai.
When I want to shit, making the jumps back to the Marie-Horn world.
And I guess it's Nayunas or Niyunas teaching him the Shonai game.
I was fascinated enough about that to wonder if there was any modern behind that particular
game and its purpose or its intention.
I suppose that if I thought very far back into my childhood I could think of games that
I played that were similar.
With them games, games of coordination.
The game to the Marie is a form of literature.
It contains the relationships of the people.
And as such, I suppose the great deal of it was made up completely out of whole clock.
Because from simply the initial thought of a rhythm game, the original concept that I
had it was simply a rhythm or a champ.
And beyond that, the concept grew as my understanding of the Marie increased just by working with
that sort of culture.
Until I began to realize that if you're playing this thing as dangerously as they play it,
that it's going to make a great deal of difference in terms of the weaknesses and strengths of
the players.
It's going to have a great deal to say about the interdependencies and independences,
if you will, of the individuals within the community who can play with whom, who sets
up the whom, who is alive to whom.
And it also has to do with the philosophy of the people, which again has to do with the
great now, the ability to turn loose of the thing and to live for the moment, which stretches
in all directions in time, to as Neon puts it open the hand and let's go, which is one of
the hardest things that Duncan has to learn.
Okay, remember a question in those books.
It seemed to me that you did leave them opening at the end of the third volume, and I wanted
to ask if you perhaps could have any plans to continue with Marie.
Yes, there is a possibility of that.
I had to work so intensely with that culture for quite a while that I do not at present trust
myself to tamper with it.
I think that like the more game book, there is a possibility of my going back and working
with it again.
As a matter of fact, I already have sort of the germ of an idea, but it will have to get
a mosque for quite a while.
I want to make sure that if I disturb them again, it's for a worthy cause.
Not just to write a book to be a sequel, but to be sure that it is a kind of story
that could only be told with Marie.
That's one of the penalties working with cultures.
You lose the ability to say, well, I would like to write a story, and I think I will write
a story with these people.
When the story is that I told us is round as deeply into the culture and history of a species
as the faded sun was, you have to come up with another kind of story which could only
be told about that culture.
Okay, let me round around one more work.
What was the impetus behind the short stories in the book, Sam Fallow?
It's so different than the other things you've done.
I wondered what was behind that.
Well, it's different perhaps than other things which have come to life.
But I think that I travel the great deal about the world.
I've been in, well, let me think, I've been to Rome and to London.
I've never been in Paris, actually, but I've been all over France.
And East Ambulance, which didn't make it in, I was going to do an East Ambulance story.
And maybe yet, I've never been to Beijing either.
But basically, I began thinking about the organism of a city as an entity.
The concept of a city having a personality different than all other things.
You go to New York and you could not mistake it for Rome.
It's just a composite of people living there gives it a different flavor.
A different case, a different style than any other place.
Also, to a certain extent, I suppose it's psychologically related to the faded sun.
Because when I was thinking about another species at the end of time, I wondered what about our own, what about the Earth when we're very, very old.
What sort of thing might we preserve as our artifacts?
And the idea occurred to me that one of the things that humanity has created, which for all we know maybe unique, humanity, is this concept we call city.
And consequently, the story arose with the cities differentiating from each other to such an extent that we return to the age of the city state.
Civilization is slowly being cancelled just because of the interval of distance, time and the difference of culture over the years.
So the idea behind that book would have been conceived before you wrote the short stories or did you write the short stories individually and then think of a way to put them together.
Well, actually, the initial story in the whole piece was the Rome story.
George Siddharz then with Isaac Ebbath as a magazine had shown the cover, which contained a fantastical number of elements.
And sort of on a bad-ass case, I could write a short story based on that.
Because back in the old age, you know, writers did use to write stories that the covers rather than the other way around.
So I undertook it and George's comment on the story was about that.
Most editors make on my short stories, which was this seems to be connected to something else.
Now, probably the affliction of novel of stews.
But I wrote that one in a lay about a while.
And then, you know, at the world conventions, they're always asking you to do readings from your work and I didn't have one.
So I sat down and wrote the only death in the city as sort of inspired for the Rome story.
And that one said in Paris, so that I had something to read at the world convention, which I did.
Then it suddenly struck me that I had two stories, which were obviously connected to something else.
And finally, it dawned on me that I could do several more of them since they were of an untidy link and I actually have a book.
So out of all that broth of thinking about the world, all they each and the character of cities and the fact that I had two of them in hand, why I sat down and wrote several of them right in the string one after the other.
Okay. I got the impression of some of those stories.
For instance, the Paris one in the Moscow one that you may have consciously been minding them on the Faulttail method.
They seem very much like a Faulttail or a Faulttail to me almost.
It wouldn't be surprising because I've done a great deal of working this.
I also personally couldn't believe that Faulttails are a fairly accurate form of preserving the group consciousness of the people.
The re-caling of them through the centuries, everybody adds their own demeanor, their own layer of experience so that some of our very old stories acquire more and more significance as the older they get.
That Cinderella being a good case in point which has been changed in practically every century, has been retold to fit the current myth of.
In the Paris one, I think that I was not consciously drawing on any single fairy tale that I can think of.
In the Russian one, definitely, I don't know frankly, I don't know very much about Moscow.
I literally had to look up a city plan to find out what it was like.
I had to look up about Old Moscow and to see how far it's stretched.
Probably what the first settlement was where the first building stood and why and all of this sort of thing.
I wanted to determine that and I began thinking back on all the quintessential Russian stories that I'd ever heard, most of which seemed to involve roles in one form or another.
I thought of the character of the land.
I have studied Russian. I have taken the Russian language so that I know something about the literature and I know something about the interrelations of the words, what concepts related to other words and what words are psychologically important within the language.
So I just stirred all that together and came out with the Moscow story.
Okay, in the observation of the question on that book, you didn't have in mind any echo of the diner of the earth.
Did you, were the earth is living its last days and the various cultures on it or at their end?
Well, I would say that was unconscious of it. The diner of the earth is something I read so long ago that I think that I'm almost ready to reread it as I do things which I enjoy a great deal.
Having forgotten some of the salient details of it, so deeply that I think that now again I can enjoy it.
As I did the first time I do recall that I liked it a great deal that I cannot for the life of me remember exactly what went on in it.
Which is the kind of reader I am when I really am loving a book I begin to attempt to blur it in my mind and forget it as rapidly as possible so that I can have the pleasure of rereading it within a year or so.
But I think that some of the influences on my writing in later periods than the first ones that I named have been Jack Vance and Fritz Labour.
And so on and I don't think that one can remain unaffected by those ideas.
They have both of those writers have written on topics that I'm very fond of which is the urban community in fantasy.
So often fantasy puts one lone barbarian wandering off across an icy landscape coping with what comes.
But the urban community in fantasy is the province of those two writers in particular that I think of at the moment.
And definitely they have had their influence on whether subconscious or direct.
I did receive a very kind letter from Fritz Labour who was kind enough to say that he had read Sunfall and we shared some feelings for cities.
One thing also that has impressed me a great deal over the work that has been out that I read of yours is the flexibility of your style.
And I read it if you consciously work at a particular style for a particular book.
Sometimes if you change it, do you alter anything in terms of the story and the kind of book you're writing?
I suppose that that has to do with being a bit of a linguist.
There's also the fact that I have to sprate myself with writing conduct electronic examiner or virtual students with what I mean.
And in some books I do allow myself to slip into a little bit more poetic style.
It also seems to me that one style should be appropriate to the story that one is telling.
So that if you're telling a story about nomads whose very means of expression is going to be perhaps figurative and poetical.
Then you can do this sort of thing in the faded sense for instance the styles very radically from chapter to chapter.
According to whether I happen to be dealing with the rather well the nomadic culture of the Marie or whether I'm dealing with the human who tends to be very narration background tends to be much more stark and efficient.
I've worked in gear fantasy stories where I've looked at the language myself and looked back on it and thought oh my goodness I think I've been writing it with them again.
I have it which I try to cure myself because I do try to write prose.
In down below station the style varies again.
That is I think fairly well modern style.
And I guess that I just view it as a part of the composition.
For instance if I were doing a portrait as an artist I think I would automatically tend to fall into a style in my drawing and my painting.
Rather than trying to be a cubist or a pointalist or whatever.
And it's the same way with my handling of words if I'm talking on a subject that is itself old.
In my style is different than one in which I'm talking about computers unless I'm making a point.
If I were for instance talking about a computer as a vehicle of prophecy I might deliberately fall back into an older mode of expression relating it back to deliathy or something.
While I find that's one of the hardest things in the world in writing secrets is because my mode of expression changes also with time.
It's very very difficult for me to go back and to recapture the language of a particular book.
I have to reread it myself several times to fall back into that mode of expression.
You know what I imagine I would be true.
That sort of brings up another question I was going to ask you on.
When you start to write a book do you see entirely plot the thing out and have it fixed and then simply put it on paper or do you just get in the moon and just let it come out whatever comes.
There's only one book that I've written straight through from beginning to end. Well maybe two.
I did a number of false starts I have about 10 to 15 different beginnings for date of Israel.
After it gets beyond chapter five then everything proceeds like a straight line to the end.
Many of the later chapters are written first draft which is very unusual for me.
Eight drafts is not unusual in the book.
The paper I generate is really phenomenal.
I have filled a, I could literally fill a personal basket without taking some most novels.
But the one that I did write originally from start to finish without a glitch was way without a shore.
That one I just started the chapter one and pardon me.
And it's from chapter one to the very end.
It was virtually all first draft and I think I went through three.
And that was it.
Most of the others I find that I don't even start at the beginning of the book.
What is now chapter eight in the faded sun started out as chapter one and so on.
Like my literary idol Virgil I can write in both directions at once.
So it begins at a point in action which makes sense to me and then I discover that I have to build back of that to explain how everybody got into the situation that I visualized at the beginning.
Okay.
I think I know the answer to this or I could suspect it.
I'm going to ask it anyhow.
Your use of when you set up an alien culture the term, the language that you make up for.
For instance, in the hunter of warrants I think you did it more extensively.
They're the most other places.
Are you using any kind of language structure or any any kind of language uses a background for that?
Or just your own knowledge of linguistics that allows you to make that up?
I consciously try to make it easy on the reader.
Some readers I suppose may be not.
But I truly do.
I will, for instance, try to keep related words.
At least resembling one another closely enough that a person can figure out well.
All this is something to do with, say, love or fight.
Having seen a similar configuration before and if they miss it a little bit in terms of saying romance versus combat or something like that, at least they're in the ballpark.
I do try to be kind also in not having words which aren't related starting with the same letter.
So I do some things which are designed for kindness to the reader.
Likewise, when I'm dealing with alien names I try to avoid having two or three aliens with very similar names which can be very, very confusing because there are many people who do not read phonetically and this could be a problem to them.
So I'll try to have them start at different points of the alphabet.
Contra of worlds is constructed for different reasons.
Usually when I use alien languages in a book it is not for local color.
It's just that when you run across anybody's civilization which is vastly different than your own you're going to come across three or four words which cannot be translated no matter how you would like to.
It's just that not all languages have words for concepts.
Well, you know, like in English you can take several things that you can say that you can't say in French and vice versa.
Which is why language borrow words from other languages.
When I did hundred of world I was doing something totally different and it is an experimental novel and it is not a novel that I recommend to someone who is not used to science fiction or not used to language one or the other.
Basically on that one the very premise of the book is linguistics.
Treating the science of linguistics as you will as seriously as you treat physics in a science fiction novel.
I deliberately set out to make a language which is not based on any earthly model.
I even changed the rules of grammar to something that as far as I know is not directly based on any grammatical system on the face of the earth.
The thing is explained in a appendix in the back for people who wish to do this kind of thing.
There are several ways to read the book.
The recommended one is as the viewpoint character sees it.
Frankly, the viewpoint character is confused.
I'll get out most of the time. He doesn't understand.
You can equally well appreciate the book simply by realizing it from his viewpoint.
A lot of these people are speaking things that he and no rise can't do.
The cover book is that of course the point he's vastly mistaken about what he thinks he understands.
The book does have some good balls in it for somebody who is accustomed to believing everything that the hero in a novel believes must ergo be the truth.
He is very, very frequently mistaken or very, very frequently except a concept which is not the whole concept and gradually begins to arise and understand what's going on toward the end of the book.
I must go on everyone that even at the end he is somewhat mistaken.
That would take a little more thought.
I think it worked in some of the others.
Let me change direction one more time.
I don't know if you think about these things.
Do you have a definition of science fiction?
I think the best one ever came up with Roger Zalazni's definition, at least I believe it is.
From whom he may have gotten it.
It basically did if I ever discover a definition of science fiction, I shall immediately attempt to violate it.
The science fiction to me is a will always remain an experimental literature.
It does not have rules except to try to adhere to science and to prove things as much as possible and to try to have your research well-founded.
At least the best possible understanding of what's going on that you can't worry about.
To me science fiction is the same thing that the unknown writer of the Kilka Mesh epic did.
A boy in search of the unknown, the sort of literature.
It's the oldest kind of literature in the world.
Frankly, I thought you modern mainstream fiction is an aberration.
I largely brought on by a culture shock with the advent of the machine age.
I think that it was sort of a reaction by a literary establishment that was not technologically educated and was in many instances not equipped to understand what was going on in the world.
They retreated into a rather unrealistic form of literature which really attempted to either ignore the transformation into taking place in human society or having seen it or trying to deal with it could see no answer for it.
My view of science fiction is that it is the cultural mainstream of Western literature and Eastern literature as well in many forms.
And that it's a different in spirit or in type than the old epic.
Epics are essentially literature of migration and man-kind is presently contemplating a rather large one.
Could you tell me what you think draws people to science fiction right so popular?
I think the same thing that is always drawn to all of the aforementioned curiosity.
It's a wish to be in touch with one's environment, one's real environment.
There are so many people who go through their daily lives concerned only with what happens in the office and what happens around them.
And it's sort of like being locked in one cell if you never see beyond that.
Nature and the universe have so much more to it than what you perceive if you limit your vision to your immediate time and your immediate place and your immediate circumstance.
The new, the certain ability in ordinary daily affairs, I do not deny that.
But I think the real understanding of what actually goes on in this ordinary daily affairs only comes to a wider understanding of the universe's home.
And this is what I think draws people to science fiction to fantasy, to this whole vast realm of a romantical or positive way of looking at the universe which has been in the mainstream of all of the literature began.
Okay, maybe you've answered this already, maybe I'm just restating the question, but let me ask it anyhow.
Do you think science fiction has a particular value for its readers?
I could not hear the last part of that question.
But would you say that science fiction had a particular value? Is it a valuable thing for its readers?
Yes, I would say that the value of science fiction is essentially the broadening of vision.
The broadening of vision in time because we do not really concern ourselves only with the future.
This is why fantasy, which deals with past ages, has been quite as comfortable in associating science fiction as it has.
On the one hand, it should seem very strange to find fantasy readers and science fiction readers trading books.
We think that we had nothing to say to each other.
But in point of fact, we have all the world to say to each other.
We have all of human experience to say to each other.
We have the long view, one sort of being the memory of mankind and the other being the hope and the aspiration of where we will go and what we will do.
Two sides of the same coin are as we would put it apart of the great now.
It's a kind of literature that ripens the experience beyond one's daily life.
It shows us the true size of the earth, the true size of the universe, the true importance of our travels, both the size and complexity of them and sometimes the extreme simplicity of them.
It gives us perspective in dealing with the world around us and with each other and shows us that we have in many instances that we are more in common than we do in difference.
Okay, that's excellent. Thank you very much.
I don't have very much more to ask you just a couple more.
Yeah, David, what are you drawing out on us? Are you okay on that end?
Yeah.
Okay.
I guess really sort of a two-prong question.
Maybe I wonder which of your books are the most popular in terms of sales, your best sellers and also maybe in terms of fan response?
It's very difficult to judge this because I'm fairly young as a writer goes.
My work's have only been out now for what six years, something like that.
And sales figures are still coming in.
So the only thing I can tell you is the oldest books have sold the most.
And there does seem, if you compare sales figures to be some next celebration in it.
Also, there must be a remarkable number of people that having read one are going for the others.
I hope that this is the case because the sales figures seem to be remarkably similar.
In terms of...
Well, there's been some books that I've noticed that have caught on a little more slowly, like Hunter.
I think that perhaps it took a little bit of readers getting used to me before they were ready to be all the time to the world.
But in general, I would say that the sales have been fairly well, fairly well even.
Or if they were not even, they tend to become more and more even.
Which I think has also helped with the fact that all my books are in current issue.
And if one likes one, one can find the others.
So about the other, it's kind of curious again time plays a part of that.
The more game books, the Gate trilogy does attract a great deal of male response in AIL.
In the sense that possibly because it is a finished story, and there was a great deal of love it, and possibly people spent a great deal of time with it.
Also the fact that I think fantasy people are great letter writers.
I do get quite a lot of male on that.
It also seems to provoke Spanish art.
I've seen a great number of very beautiful renditions of the characters from that book, which again may say something about the...
You know what people's favorite may be.
But then it's got a lot of things that are really nice to draw like horses and medieval armor and this sort of thing.
And I also get a great deal of male about the faded son trilogy.
And a great deal of interest in that one.
So the two longer ones.